chore(docs): docs keys page update (#11449)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: docs/docs/aztec/concepts/accounts/keys.md

tags: [accounts, keys]
---

In this section, you will learn what keys are used in Aztec, and how the addresses are derived.

## Types of keys

Each Aztec account is backed by four key pairs: 
- Nullifier keys – used to spend notes.
- Incoming viewing keys – used to encrypt a note for the recipient.
- Address keys – this is an auxiliary key used for the address derivation; it’s internally utilized by the protocol and does not require any action from developers.
- Signing keys – an optional key pair used for account authorization. 

The first three pairs are embedded into the protocol while the signing key is abstracted up to the account contract developer.

### Nullifier keys 

Nullifier keys are presented as a pair of the master nullifier public key (`Npk_m`) and the master nullifier secret key (`nsk_m`). 

> To spend a note, the user computes a nullifier corresponding to this note. A nullifier is a hash of the note hash and nullifier secret key. To compute the nullifier, the user needs to prove that they know the nullifier secret key. In particular, they prove that their nullifier secret key is embedded into their address. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To spend a note, the user computes a nullifier corresponding to this note. A nullifier is a hash of the note hash and app siloed nullifier secret key, the latter is derived using the nullifier master secret key.  To compute the nullifier, the protocol checks that the app siloed key is derived from the master key for this contract and that master nullifier public key is linked to the note owner's address. 
```

### Incoming viewing keys

> The incoming viewing public key (`Ivpk`) is used by the sender to encrypt a note for the recipient. The corresponding incoming viewing secret key (`ivsk`) is used by the recipient to decrypt the note.

Reviewer: nt: here we use Ivpk (capital I) and later we use ivsk (small i). Do public keys usually start off with capital letters? If not can we make it consistent?
Same for esk/Epk - again maybe this is a convention I never knew

Author: Yes, I got from @iAmMichaelConnor – this is a convention that all secret keys start with small letter and public – with a large letter.

When it comes to notes encryption and decryption:
- For each note, there is a randomly generated ephemeral key pair (`esk`, `Epk`) where `Epk = esk * G`. 
- The `AddressPublicKey` (derived from the `Ivsk`) together with `esk` are encrypted as a secret `S`, `S = esk * AddressPublicKey`.
- `symmetric_encryption_key = hash(S)`
- `Ciphertext = aes_encrypt(note, symmetric_encryption_key)`
- The recipient gets a pair (`Epk`, `Ciphertext`)
- The recipient uses the `address_sk` to decrypt the secret: `S = Epk * address_sk`.
- The recipient uses the decrypted secret to decrypt the ciphertext.

### Address keys

> Address keys are used for account address derivation. 

Reviewer: link to approrpiate place in the docs that also talks about addresses/accounts

Address keys are a pair of keys `AddressPublicKey` and `address_sk` where `address_sk` is a scalar defined as `address_sk = pre_address + ivsk` and `AddressPublicKey` is an elliptic curve point. `pre_address` can be thought of as a hash of all account’s key pairs and functions in the account contract: `pre_address := poseidon2(public_keys_hash, partial_address)` where `partial_address := poseidon2(contract_class_id, salted_initialization_hash)` and `public_keys_hash := poseidon2(Npk_m, Ivpk_m, Ovpk_m, Tpk_m)`.

:::note
Under the current design Aztec protocol does not use `Ovpk` (outgoing viewing key) and `Tpk` (tagging key). However, formally they still exist and can be used by developers for some non-trivial design choices if needed. 
:::

### Signing keys

> Thanks to the native account abstraction, authorization logic can be implemented in an alternative way using Google authorization credentials, vanilla password logic or Face ID mechanism. In all these cases signing keys are not relevant.

Reviewer: link to the concept docs that talk about account abstraction on Aztec

and also backlink from that page to here, since we should talk about signing keys there too!

This is a snippet of our Schnorr Account contract implementation, which uses Schnorr signatures for authentication:

#include_code is_valid_impl /noir-projects/noir-contracts/contracts/schnorr_account_contract/src/main.nr rust

### Storing signing keys

Since signatures are fully abstracted, how the public key is stored in the contract is abstracted as well and left to the developer of the account contract. Among a few common approaches are storing the key in a private note, in an immutable private note, using shared mutable state, reusing other in-protocol keys, or a separate keystore. Below, we elaborate on these approaches.

#### Using a private note​

Storing the signing public key in a private note makes it accessible from the entrypoint function, which is required to be a private function, and allows for rotating the key when needed. However, keep in mind that reading a private note requires nullifying it to ensure it is up-to-date, so each transaction you send will destroy and recreate the public key so the protocol circuits can be sure that the notes are not stale.

#### Using an immutable private note​

> Similar to using a private note, but using an immutable private note removes the need to nullify the note on every read. This generates no nullifiers and commitments per transaction. However, it does not allow the user to rotate their key if they lose it.

Reviewer: add the code snippet like you did with is_valid_impl

Reviewer 2: are you thinking to add a code snippet about private immutable, like [this](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/blob/d922a13f83e12a942ec66a673f6785d28481d46c/noir-projects/noir-contracts/contracts/schnorr_account_contract/src/main.nr#L28)? or like the public key note like [this](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/blob/d922a13f83e12a942ec66a673f6785d28481d46c/noir-projects/noir-contracts/contracts/schnorr_account_contract/src/public_key_note.nr#L15-L19)?

:::note
When it comes to storing the signing key in a private note, there are several details that rely on the wallets:
- A note with a key is managed similar to any other private note. Wallets are expected to backup all the notes so that they can be restored on another device (e.g. if the user wants to move to another device). 
- The note with the key might exist locally only (in PXE) or it can be broadcasted as an encrypted note by the wallet to itself. In the second case, this note will also exist on Aztec. 
:::

#### Using Shared Mutable state

:::note

> By Shared Mutable we mean privately readable publicly mutable state.

Reviewer: link to shared mutable in docs

#### Using a separate keystore​

Since there are no restrictions on the actions that an account contract may execute for authenticating a transaction (as long as these are all private function executions), the signing public keys can be stored in a separate keystore contract that is checked on every call. In this case, each user could keep a single contract that acts as a keystore, and have multiple account contracts that check against that keystore for authorization. This will incur a higher proving time for each transaction, but has no additional cost in terms of fees.

### Keys generation

All key pairs (except for the signing keys) are generated in the [Private Execution Environment](../pxe/index.md) (PXE) when a user creates an account. PXE is also responsible for the further key management (oracle access to keys, app siloed keys derivation, etc.)

### Keys derivation 

> All key pairs are derived using elliptic curve public-key cryptography on the [Grumpkin curve](https://hackmd.io/@aztec-network/ByzgNxBfd#2-Grumpkin---A-curve-on-top-of-BN-254-for-SNARK-efficient-group-operations). Where the secret key is represented as a scalar and the public key is represented as an elliptic curve point multiplied by that scalar. 

Reviewer: can we check that the hackMD is accessible publicly?
Better yet can we just move it to this doc rather than hyperlinking to some hgackMD?

Author: Changed for GitHub repo link instead. Doesn't seem relevant to introduce the definition of EC here.

The address private key is an exception and derived in a way described above in the section “Address keys”.

> ### The special case of escrow contracts

Reviewer: beautiful <3

Participants in this escrow contract would then somehow get a hold of the escrow's `nsk_m` and nullify the notes based on the logic of the escrow. An example of an escrow contract is a betting contract. In this scenario, both parties involved in the bet would be aware of the escrow's `nsk_m`. The escrow would then release the reward only to the party that provides a "proof of winning".

### App siloed keys

All keys on Aztec (except for the signing keys) are app-siloed meaning they are scoped to the contract that requests them. This means that the keys used for the same user in two different application contracts will be different. 

App-siloed keys allow to minimize damage of potential key leaks as a leak of the scoped keys would only affect one application.

App-siloed keys are derived from the corresponding master keys and the contract address. For example, for the app-siloed nullifier secret key: `nsk_app = hash(nsk_m, app_contract_address)`. 

> App-siloed keys are derived in PXE every time the user interacts with the application.

Reviewer: mention siloing derivation? Or hyperlink ot protocol page where we have it

### Incoming viewing keys

The incoming viewing public key (`Ivpk`) is used by the sender to encrypt a note for the recipient. The corresponding incoming viewing secret key (`ivsk`) is used by the recipient to decrypt the note.

When it comes to notes encryption and decryption:
- For each note, there is a randomly generated ephemeral key pair (`esk`, `Epk`) where `Epk = esk * G`. 
- The `AddressPublicKey` (derived from the `Ivsk`) together with `esk` are encrypted as a secret `S`, `S = esk * AddressPublicKey`.
- `symmetric_encryption_key = hash(S)`
- `Ciphertext = aes_encrypt(note, symmetric_encryption_key)`
- The recipient gets a pair (`Epk`, `Ciphertext`)
- The recipient uses the `address_sk` to decrypt the secret: `S = Epk * address_sk`.
- The recipient uses the decrypted secret to decrypt the ciphertext.

> ### Address keys

Reviewer 2: It might be good to move this section above the section on 'Incoming view keys' since you explain where address_sk and AddressPublicKey come from in here, and you reference them above.

Address keys are used for account [address derivation](../accounts/index.md).

> Address keys are a pair of keys `AddressPublicKey` and `address_sk` where `address_sk` is a scalar defined as `address_sk = pre_address + ivsk` and `AddressPublicKey` is an elliptic curve point. `pre_address` can be thought of as a hash of all account’s key pairs and functions in the account contract: `pre_address := poseidon2(public_keys_hash, partial_address)` where `partial_address := poseidon2(contract_class_id, salted_initialization_hash)` and `public_keys_hash := poseidon2(Npk_m, Ivpk_m, Ovpk_m, Tpk_m)`.

Author: Yes, that's correct.
